# Data_incubator_challenge_April-2018
                                                 Impact of immigration on elections

Are voters more likely to vote for populist parties and candidates when there are more immigrants in their neighborhood? The recent wave of election victories to populist parties has brought this question to the forefront of our political discourse. In European Union, voters in Italy, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, Hungary, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom have expressed strong support for far-right parties who have staunch anti-immigration views. In the United States, president Donald Trump's anti-immigrant rhetoric has fueled intense debate over the future composition of American society. Cracking down on illegal immigration was a centerpiece of Mr. Trump's 2016 presidential campaign and possible won him the election.

This project will study the impact of immigration on elections in Western democracies. The first part of the project will analyze official election and demographic census data from United States, Canada and European Union to establish if there is a causal relation between immigration and voting for populist parties. The second part aims to utilize social media posts on immigration from these countries to tease out the channels through which immigration affects election. We hypothesize that there are two main channels – Voters can change preferences and voting behavior as a reaction to immigration inflows. If the voters perceive immigration to be harmful to them and their communities, they are likely to vote for parties that have a stricter anti-immigration stance. The second channel explores how political parties change their strategies when immigration inflows increase. In places with low political competition, political parties can select ideological candidates who focus on ideological issues such as immigration. Where political competition is high, parties would like to attract swing voters by focusing the local political campaign on non-ideological issues, i.e., avoiding issues such as immigration.

We begin with France as it represents one of the few recent cases where a far-right party gained massive popularity but ultimately did not win the presidential election. We look at voting for Front National (FN), an extreme-right wing populist party in France, which garnered international attention when it reached the final round of presidential elections in 2017. We build a department-year level database and focus on the first round of presidential elections since 1988. There are two ways in which immigrants can affect voting - directly by acquiring citizenship and voting themselves and indirectly by influencing the voting behavior of native citizens. Naturalized immigrants have different political preferences than natives and hence a change in their share in a department can affect the share of votes for Front National. Noncitizen immigrants indirectly impact voting outcomes as they alter the preferences of the voting population who may see them as a threat or a benefit.

Figure 1, panel a represents the distribution of vote shares for Front National in presidential elections since 1988. Panel b and c plot the distribution of naturalized immigrant shares and non-citizen immigrant shares by departments over time. The median vote share for Front National rose from 1988 to 2002, fell in 2007, and rose sharply in 2012 and 2017. The median share of non-citizen immigrants has remained relatively stagnant over the years but the median share of naturalized immigrants has gone up, starting from 2.9 percent in 1988 to 3.8 percent in 2007 and ending at 4.5 percent in 2017. 

Figure 2, considers the simple correlation between the share of total immigrants and share of votes for FN. We plot the change in the share of FN votes between 1988 and 2017 against change in total immigrants during the same period. Each point on the graph represents a department. We find a negative correlation between the growth in the total immigrant share and FN vote share. However, simple correlations can be misleading as they mask the influence of confounding variables. Future work will involve running fixed effect panel regressions to identify the causal impact of immigration and analyzing social media posts on immigrations to understand the mechanism behind.
